1. Behav Brain Res. 2021 May 7;405:113201. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2021.113201. Epub 
2021 Feb 26.

Targeting muscarinic receptors to treat schizophrenia.

Foster DJ(1), Bryant ZK(1), Conn PJ(2).

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, 37232, 
United States; Warren Center for Neuroscience Drug Discovery, Vanderbilt 
University, Nashville, TN, 37232, United States.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, 37232, 
United States; Warren Center for Neuroscience Drug Discovery, Vanderbilt 
University, Nashville, TN, 37232, United States. Electronic address: 
jeff.conn@vanderbilt.edu.

Schizophrenia is a severe neuropsychiatric disorder characterized by a diverse 
range of symptoms that can have profound impacts on the lives of patients. 
Currently available antipsychotics target dopamine receptors, and while they are 
useful for ameliorating the positive symptoms of the disorder, this approach 
often does not significantly improve negative and cognitive symptoms. 
Excitingly, preclinical and clinical research suggests that targeting specific 
muscarinic acetylcholine receptor subtypes could provide more comprehensive 
symptomatic relief with the potential to ameliorate numerous symptom domains. 
Mechanistic studies reveal that M1, M4, and M5 receptor subtypes can modulate 
the specific brain circuits and physiology that are disrupted in schizophrenia 
and are thought to underlie positive, negative, and cognitive symptoms. Novel 
therapeutic strategies for targeting these receptors are now advancing in 
clinical and preclinical development and expand upon the promise of these new 
treatment strategies to potentially provide more comprehensive relief than 
currently available antipsychotics.

Copyright © 2021 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2021.113201
PMCID: PMC8006961
PMID: 33647377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Am J Psychiatry. 2022 Sep;179(9):611-627. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.21101083. Epub 
2022 Jun 27.

Muscarinic Acetylcholine Receptor Agonists as Novel Treatments for 
Schizophrenia.

Paul SM(1), Yohn SE(1), Popiolek M(1), Miller AC(1), Felder CC(1).

Author information:
(1)Karuna Therapeutics, Boston.

Schizophrenia remains a challenging disease to treat effectively with current 
antipsychotic medications due to their limited efficacy across the entire 
spectrum of core symptoms as well as their often burdensome side-effect profiles 
and poor tolerability. An unmet need remains for novel, mechanistically unique, 
and better tolerated therapeutic agents for treating schizophrenia, especially 
those that treat not only positive symptoms but also the negative and cognitive 
symptoms of the disease. Almost 25 years ago, the muscarinic acetylcholine 
receptor (mAChR) agonist xanomeline was reported to reduce psychotic symptoms 
and improve cognition in patients with Alzheimer's disease. The antipsychotic 
and procognitive properties of xanomeline were subsequently confirmed in a small 
study of acutely psychotic patients with chronic schizophrenia. These unexpected 
clinical findings have prompted considerable efforts across academia and 
industry to target mAChRs as a new approach to potentially treat schizophrenia 
and other psychotic disorders. The authors discuss recent advances in mAChR 
biology and pharmacology and the current understanding of the relative roles of 
the various mAChR subtypes, their downstream cellular effectors, and key neural 
circuits mediating the reduction in the core symptoms of schizophrenia in 
patients treated with xanomeline. They also provide an update on the status of 
novel mAChR agonists currently in development for potential treatment of 
schizophrenia and other neuropsychiatric disorders.

DOI: 10.1176/appi.ajp.21101083
PMID: 35758639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2022 Dec;43(12):1098-1112. doi: 
10.1016/j.tips.2022.09.006. Epub 2022 Oct 20.

Muscarinic acetylcholine receptors for psychotic disorders: bench-side to 
clinic.

Yohn SE(1), Weiden PJ(1), Felder CC(1), Stahl SM(2).

Author information:
(1)Karuna Therapeutics, Boston, MA, USA.
(2)University of California San Diego at Riverside, La Jolla, CA, USA. 
Electronic address: smstahl@neiglobal.com.

Modern interest in muscarinic acetylcholine receptor (mAChR) activators for 
schizophrenia began in the 1990s when xanomeline, an M1/M4-preferring mAChR 
agonist developed for cognitive symptoms of Alzheimer's disease (AD), had 
unexpected antipsychotic activity. However, strategies to address tolerability 
concerns associated with activation of peripheral mAChRs were not available at 
that time. The discovery of specific targeted ligands and combination treatments 
to reduce peripheral mAChR engagement have advanced the potential of mAChR 
activators as effective treatments for psychotic disorders. This review provides 
perspectives on the background of the identification of mAChRs as potential 
antipsychotics, advances in the preclinical understanding of mAChRs as targets, 
and the current state of mAChR activators under active clinical development for 
schizophrenia.

Copyright © 2022 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tips.2022.09.006
PMID: 36273943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of interests S.E.Y., P.W.W. and 
C.C.F. are employees of and hold equity in Karuna Therapeutics. S.M.S. has 
served as a consultant to Acadia, Adamas, Alkermes, Allergan, Abbvie, Arbor 
Pharmaceutcials, AstraZeneca, Avanir, Axovant, Axsome, Biogen, Biomarin, 
Biopharma, Celgene, Concert, ClearView, DepoMed, EMD Serono, Eisai 
Pharmaceuticals, Eurolink, Ferring, Forest, Genomind, Innovative Science 
Solutions, Impel, Karuna, NeuroPharma, Intra-Cellular Therapies, Ironshore 
Pharmaceuticals, Janssen, Jazz, Karuna, Lilly, Lundbeck, Merck, Neos, 
Neurocrine, Novartis, Noveida, Otsuka, Perrigo, Pfizer, Pierre Fabre, Proxymm, 
Relmada, Reviva, Sage Therapeutics, Servier, Shire, Sprout, Sunovion, TMS 
NeuroHealth, Takeda, Taliaz, Teva, Tonix, Tris Pharma, Trius, Vanda, Vertex, and 
Viforpharma; he holds options in Genomind, Lipidio, and Delix; he has been a 
board member of RCT Logic and Genomind; he has served on speakers bureaus for 
Acadia, Genentech, Janssen, Lundbeck, Merck, Otsuka, Servier, Sunovion, Takeda, 
and Teva; and he has received research and/or grant support from Acadia, 
Alkermes, Allergan/AbbVie, AssureX, Astra Zeneca, Arbor Pharmaceuticals, Avanir, 
Axovant, Biogen, Braeburn Pharmaceuticals, Bristol Myers Squibb, Celgene, 
CeNeRx, Cephalon, Dey, Eisai, Eli Lilly, Forest, GenOmind, Glaxo Smith Kline, 
Harmony Biosciences, Indivior, Intra-Cellular Therapies, Ironshore, ISSWSH, 
Janssen, JayMac, Jazz, Lundbeck, Merck, Neurocrine, Neuronetics, Novartis, 
Otsuka, Pear Therapeutics, Pfizer, Reviva, Roche, Sage, Servier, Shire, Sprout, 
Sunovion, Supernus, TMS NeuroHealth Centers, Takeda, Teva, Tonix, Torrent, and 
Vanda.


4. Biol Psychiatry. 2024 Oct 15;96(8):627-637. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2024.03.014. 
Epub 2024 Mar 25.

Muscarinic Receptor Activators as Novel Treatments for Schizophrenia.

Paul SM(1), Yohn SE(2), Brannan SK(2), Neugebauer NM(2), Breier A(3).

Author information:
(1)Karuna Therapeutics, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Psychiatry and 
Neurology, Washington University of St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri. Electronic 
address: smpaulmd@gmail.com.
(2)Karuna Therapeutics, Boston, Massachusetts.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, Indiana.

Achieving optimal treatment outcomes for individuals living with schizophrenia 
remains challenging, despite 70 years of drug development efforts. Many 
chemically distinct antipsychotics have been developed over the past 7 decades 
with improved safety and tolerability but with only slight variation in 
efficacy. All antipsychotics currently approved for the treatment of 
schizophrenia act as antagonists or partial agonists at the dopamine D2 
receptor. With only a few possible exceptions, antipsychotic drugs have similar 
and modest efficacy for treating positive symptoms and are relatively 
ineffective in addressing the negative and cognitive symptoms of the disease. 
The development of novel treatments focused on targeting muscarinic 
acetylcholine receptors (mAChRs) has been of interest for more than 25 years 
following reports that treatment with a dual M1/M4-preferring mAChR agonist 
resulted in antipsychotic-like effects and procognitive properties in 
individuals living with Alzheimer's disease and schizophrenia; more recent 
clinical trials have confirmed these findings. In addition, advances in our 
understanding of the receptor binding and activation properties of xanomeline at 
specific mAChRs have the potential to inform future drug design targeting 
mAChRs.

Copyright © 2024 Society of Biological Psychiatry. Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2024.03.014
PMID: 38537670 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


5. J Clin Psychiatry. 2022 Feb 15;83(1):SU21024IP1. doi: 10.4088/JCP.SU21024IP1.

Emerging Treatments in Schizophrenia.

Correll CU(1)(2)(3), Abi-Dargham A(4), Howes O(5).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, The Zucker Hillside Hospital, Glen Oaks, New York.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Molecular Medicine, Donald and Barbara Zucker 
School of Medicine at Hofstra/Northwell, Hempstead, New York.
(3)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry, Charité Universitätsmedizin, 
Berlin, Germany.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, Renaissance School of Medicine, Stony Brook 
University, New York.
(5)Institute of Psychiatry, Psychology and Neuroscience, King's College, London, 
UK.

Although antipsychotics have been available for almost 70 years and greatly 
improved outcomes for individuals with schizophrenia, all currently available 
options derive their efficacy from blockade of dopaminergic receptors. However, 
this mechanism of action leaves many symptoms unresolved and is associated with 
a significant side effect burden. The mechanisms underlying schizophrenia, which 
were initially thought to be related to excessive presynaptic dopamine in 
specific areas of the brain, are now understood to be much more complex and 
involve structural and molecular changes throughout brain circuits. 
Consequently, drug discovery efforts have sought new targets in the search for 
safer and more effective medications that can improve symptoms of schizophrenia 
and psychosis, including trace amine-associated receptors (TAARs), muscarinic 
receptors, and serotonergic receptors. Positive phase 2 trial results indicating 
efficacy and safety of the TAAR1 agonist ulotaront (SEP-363856) and of the 
muscarinic M1/M4 agonist KarXT (xanomeline plus trospium) for total, positive, 
and negative symptoms in patients with acute exacerbation of schizophrenia, and 
of the serotonin 5-HT2A agonist/antagonist pimavanserin in patients with 
schizophrenia and predominant negative symptoms for negative symptom control are 
encouraging. Taken together, these data indicate in the context of ongoing phase 
3 trial programs that patients with schizophrenia may soon have access to the 
first non-D2 blocking medication, which could drastically change the treatment 
landscape and improve outcomes for many of the individuals with schizophrenia 
who do not fully respond to or cannot tolerate currently available antipsychotic 
agents that currently all act via postsynaptic dopamine D2 receptor blockade.

© Copyright 2022 Physicians Postgraduate Press, Inc.

DOI: 10.4088/JCP.SU21024IP1
PMID: 35172048


6. Clin Drug Investig. 2024 Jul;44(7):471-493. doi: 10.1007/s40261-024-01377-9. 
Epub 2024 Jun 21.

Current Findings and Potential Mechanisms of KarXT (Xanomeline-Trospium) in 
Schizophrenia Treatment.

Azargoonjahromi A(1).

Author information:
(1)Shiraz University of Medical Sciences, Janbazan Blv, 14th Alley, Jahrom, 
Shiraz, 7417773539, Fars, Iran. aazargoonj@gmail.com.

Standard schizophrenia treatment involves antipsychotic medications that target 
D2 dopamine receptors. However, these drugs have limitations in addressing all 
symptoms and can lead to adverse effects such as motor impairments, metabolic 
effects, sedation, sexual dysfunction, cognitive impairment, and tardive 
dyskinesia. Recently, KarXT has emerged as a novel drug for schizophrenia. KarXT 
combines xanomeline, a muscarinic receptor M1 and M4 agonist, with trospium, a 
nonselective antimuscarinic agent. Of note, xanomeline can readily cross 
blood-brain barrier (BBB) and, thus, enter into the brain, thereby stimulating 
muscarinic receptors (M1 and M4). By doing so, xanomeline has been shown to 
target negative symptoms and potentially improve positive symptoms. Trospium, on 
the other hand, is not able to cross BBB, thereby not affecting M1 and M4 
receptors; instead, it acts as an antimuscarinic agent and, hence, diminishes 
peripheral activity of muscarinic receptors to minimize side effects probably 
stemming from xanomeline in other organs. Accordingly, ongoing clinical trials 
investigating KarXT's efficacy in schizophrenia have demonstrated positive 
outcomes, including significant improvements in the Positive and Negative 
Syndrome Scale (PANSS) total score and cognitive function compared with placebo. 
These findings emphasize the potential of KarXT as a promising treatment for 
schizophrenia, providing symptom relief while minimizing side effects associated 
with xanomeline monotherapy. Despite such promising evidence, further research 
is needed to confirm the efficacy, safety, and tolerability of KarXT in managing 
schizophrenia. This review article explores the current findings and potential 
mechanisms of KarXT in the treatment of schizophrenia.

© 2024. The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer Nature Switzerland 
AG.

DOI: 10.1007/s40261-024-01377-9
PMID: 38904739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Trends Pharmacol Sci. 2019 Dec;40(12):1006-1020. doi: 
10.1016/j.tips.2019.10.007. Epub 2019 Nov 8.

Targeting Muscarinic Acetylcholine Receptors for the Treatment of Psychiatric 
and Neurological Disorders.

Moran SP(1), Maksymetz J(2), Conn PJ(3).

Author information:
(1)Vanderbilt Brain Institute, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, USA; 
Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, USA; 
Vanderbilt Center for Neuroscience Drug Discovery, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, TN 37232, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, USA; 
Vanderbilt Center for Neuroscience Drug Discovery, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, TN 37232, USA.
(3)Vanderbilt Brain Institute, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, USA; 
Department of Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, USA; 
Vanderbilt Center for Neuroscience Drug Discovery, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, TN 37232, USA. Electronic address: jeffrey.conn@vanderbilt.edu.

Muscarinic acetylcholine receptors (mAChR) play important roles in regulating 
complex behaviors such as cognition, movement, and reward, making them ideally 
situated as potential drug targets for the treatment of several brain disorders. 
Recent advances in the discovery of subtype-selective allosteric modulators for 
mAChRs has provided an unprecedented opportunity for highly specific modulation 
of signaling by individual mAChR subtypes in the brain. Recently, mAChR 
allosteric modulators have entered clinical development for Alzheimer's disease 
(AD) and schizophrenia, and have potential utility for other brain disorders. 
However, mAChR allosteric modulators can display a diverse array of 
pharmacological properties, and a more nuanced understanding of the mAChR will 
be necessary to best translate preclinical findings into successful clinical 
treatments.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.tips.2019.10.007
PMCID: PMC6941416
PMID: 31711626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Curr Mol Med. 2003 Aug;3(5):419-26. doi: 10.2174/1566524033479654.

Muscarinic receptors in schizophrenia.

Dean B(1), Bymaster FP, Scarr E.

Author information:
(1)The Rebecca L. Cooper Research Laboratories, The Mental Health Research 
Institute of Victoria, Parkville, Victoria, Australia. bdean@mhri.edu.au

An increasing body of evidence suggests that the muscarinic receptors may 
present a potential therapeutic target for the treatment of schizophrenia. This 
argument is supported by studies using postmortem CNS tissue and a neuroimaging 
study that have shown there are regionally specific decreases in selective 
muscarinic receptors in the CNS of subjects with schizophrenia. This raises the 
possibility that drugs specific to individual muscarinic receptors could have 
beneficial effects on the symptoms of schizophrenia, a posit supported by 
studies in receptor knockout/knockdown mice where it has been shown that 
specific behaviours affected by schizophrenia are also abnormal in mice lacking 
a single muscarinic receptor. Moreover, drugs have been synthesised that are 
partial agonists at muscarinic receptors and these drugs have been shown to 
improve the behavioural deficits in humans which are modulated by the muscarinic 
receptor family. The widespread distribution of muscarinic receptors in the 
human CNS and the receptor specific changes identified in postmortem CNS from 
subjects with schizophrenia would suggest that drugs targeting specific 
muscarinic receptors would also need to partition into selected CNS regions to 
achieve optimal responses. Some existing compounds show regional selectivity for 
the same muscarinic receptor in different CNS regions, suggesting that this 
characteristic could be engineered into muscarinic receptor targeting drugs. 
This review presents data from diverse areas of research to argue that it is now 
imperative that the therapeutic potential of manipulating the activity of 
muscarinic receptors for the treatment of schizophrenia is fully explored.

DOI: 10.2174/1566524033479654
PMID: 12942995 [Indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Psychiatry Res. 2020 Jun;288:112989. doi: 10.1016/j.psychres.2020.112989. Epub 
2020 Apr 13.

Muscarinic M1 and M4 receptors: Hypothesis driven drug development for 
schizophrenia.

Dean B(1), Scarr E(2).

Author information:
(1)The Molecular Psychiatry Laboratory, The Florey Institute for Neuroscience 
and Mental Health, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia. Electronic address: 
brian.dean@florey.edu.au.
(2)Melbourne Veterinary School, Faculty of Veterinary and Agricultural Sciences, 
University of Melbourne, Parkville, Victoria 3010, Australia.

The finding that the drug KarXT, a formulation of xanomeline and tropsium which 
targets muscarinic receptors, has given a positive result in reducing the 
positive and negative symptoms of schizophrenia in a phase II trial suggests 
targeting muscarinic receptors is a new approach to treating the disorder. This 
review will detail the synergistic interplay between studies to understand the 
role of muscarinic receptors in the aetiology of schizophrenia and drug 
development and how this has supported the hypothesis that activating the 
muscarinic M1 and M4 receptors is critical to the efficacy of KarXT, in 
schizophrenia. The discovery of an intermediate phenotype within schizophrenia 
which is characterised by the presence of a marked loss of cortical muscarinic 
M1 receptors will be reviewed. Highlighted will be progress in understanding the 
biochemistry of that intermediate phenotype and evidence to suggest that those 
with the intermediate phenotype may resist treatment with agonist to the 
orthosteric site on the muscarinic M1 and M4 receptor. Finally, the possibility 
of using drugs targeting the allosteric binding sites on muscarinic receptors to 
treat schizophrenia will be discussed. This timely review will therefore 
highlight how research can influence hypothesis driven drug discovery that 
should produce new treatments for schizophrenia.

Copyright © 2020 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2020.112989
PMID: 32315882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Declaration of Competing Interest Nothing to 
declare.


10. Neuropharmacology. 2020 Aug 1;172:107704. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2019.107704. 
Epub 2019 Jul 9.

Antipsychotics: Mechanisms underlying clinical response and side-effects and 
novel treatment approaches based on pathophysiology.

Kaar SJ(1), Natesan S(2), McCutcheon R(2), Howes OD(3).

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychosis Studies, 5th Floor, Institute of Psychiatry, 
Psychology & Neuroscience (IoPPN), King's College London, PO63 De Crespigny 
Park, London, SE5 8AF, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
stephen.kaar@kcl.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Psychosis Studies, 5th Floor, Institute of Psychiatry, 
Psychology & Neuroscience (IoPPN), King's College London, PO63 De Crespigny 
Park, London, SE5 8AF, United Kingdom.
(3)Department of Psychosis Studies, 5th Floor, Institute of Psychiatry, 
Psychology & Neuroscience (IoPPN), King's College London, PO63 De Crespigny 
Park, London, SE5 8AF, United Kingdom. Electronic address: 
oliver.howes@kcl.ac.uk.

Antipsychotic drugs are central to the treatment of schizophrenia and other 
psychotic disorders but are ineffective for some patients and associated with 
side-effects and nonadherence in others. We review the in vitro, pre-clinical, 
clinical and molecular imaging evidence on the mode of action of antipsychotics 
and their side-effects. This identifies the key role of striatal dopamine D2 
receptor blockade for clinical response, but also for endocrine and motor 
side-effects, indicating a therapeutic window for D2 blockade. We consider how 
partial D2/3 receptor agonists fit within this framework, and the role of 
off-target effects of antipsychotics, particularly at serotonergic, 
histaminergic, cholinergic, and adrenergic receptors for efficacy and 
side-effects such as weight gain, sedation and dysphoria. We review the 
neurobiology of schizophrenia relevant to the mode of action of antipsychotics, 
and for the identification of new treatment targets. This shows elevated 
striatal dopamine synthesis and release capacity in dorsal regions of the 
striatum underlies the positive symptoms of psychosis and suggests reduced 
dopamine release in cortical regions contributes to cognitive and negative 
symptoms. Current drugs act downstream of the major dopamine abnormalities in 
schizophrenia, and potentially worsen cortical dopamine function. We consider 
new approaches including targeting dopamine synthesis and storage, 
autoreceptors, and trace amine receptors, and the cannabinoid, muscarinic, 
GABAergic and glutamatergic regulation of dopamine neurons, as well as 
post-synaptic modulation through phosphodiesterase inhibitors. Finally, we 
consider treatments for cognitive and negative symptoms such dopamine agonists, 
nicotinic agents and AMPA modulators before discussing immunological approaches 
which may be disease modifying. This article is part of the issue entitled 
'Special Issue on Antipsychotics'.

Copyright © 2019 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2019.107704
PMID: 31299229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]